Docs performance assesment (#661)
kubernetes-sigs/agent-sandbox: site/content/docs/performance-assessment/_index.md

---
title: "Performance Assessment"
linkTitle: "Performance Assessment"
weight: 3
description: >
  How to measure, benchmark, and tune the performance of the Agent Sandbox controller.
---

This guide covers the tools and techniques available for assessing the performance of Agent Sandbox — from tuning controller concurrency, to running load tests, to collecting and interpreting benchmark results.

## Controller Performance Tuning

The `agent-sandbox-controller` exposes several flags that directly affect throughput and API server pressure. Raising these is the first step before running any load test.

> 

Reviewer: @igooch - we use different numbers.
You're working on a similar doc to publish - "here's how we get close to 200ms P90".
Please collaborate so we can have that version in here.

---

> title: "Performance Assessment"

Reviewer: This page creates a brand-new `docs/guides/` section, but there is no `site/content/docs/guides/_index.md` in the repo or in this PR. With Docsy/Hugo, a section directory without an `_index.md` branch page generally won't appear in the left-nav docs tree, so this page risks being unreachable from the site navigation. Please add a minimal `guides/_index.md` (title + weight) or move the page under an existing section.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in 0b6c98d — moved the page out of the index-less `guides/` section into a flat `docs/performance-assessment/`, matching every other top-level docs section, rather than adding a new `guides/_index.md` for a section that would only ever contain this one page.

- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--sandbox-claim-concurrent-workers=10"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--sandbox-warm-pool-concurrent-workers=10"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--sandbox-template-concurrent-workers=10"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--kube-api-qps=50"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--kube-api-burst=100"
```

Reference the patch from `kustomization.yaml` using `patches` with an explicit `target` and `options.type: json`:

```yaml
# kustomization.yaml
patches:
  - path: patch-args.yaml
    target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: agent-sandbox-controller
      namespace: agent-sandbox-system
    options:
      type: json
```

---

## E2E Benchmarks

The repository ships Go benchmarks in `test/e2e/` that measure Sandbox and SandboxClaim startup latency against a live cluster.

### Available benchmarks

| Benchmark | File | What it measures |
|-----------|------|-----------------|
| `BenchmarkChromeSandboxStartup` | `chromesandbox_test.go` | Chrome Sandbox pod startup latency |

> | `BenchmarkChromeSandboxClaimStartup` | `chromesandbox_claim_test.go` | Chrome SandboxClaim end-to-end startup latency |

Reviewer: Minor: this table is incomplete — `test/e2e/warmpool_benchmark_test.go` also ships `BenchmarkWarmPoolParallelClaim` (parallel claim latency), which `make test-e2e-benchmarks` will run. Worth adding a row so the doc doesn't go stale on day one.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in 0b6c98d — added a row for `BenchmarkWarmPoolParallelClaim`.

---
title: "Performance Assessment"
linkTitle: "Performance Assessment"
weight: 33
description: >
  How to measure, benchmark, and tune the performance of the Agent Sandbox controller.
---

This guide covers the tools and techniques available for assessing the performance of Agent Sandbox — from tuning controller concurrency, to running load tests, to collecting and interpreting benchmark results.

> ## Controller Performance Tuning

Reviewer 3: Non-blocking, but worth weighing before this merges. `docs/configuration.md` already carries the flag list, a deployment example, and a byte-identical `kubectl patch` JSON block (see its lines 7-12 and 57-59). Two copies of the same reference material is exactly how the defaults drifted stale earlier in this PR.

Consider trimming this section down to the guidance that is genuinely new here — the "Choosing worker counts" discussion and the JSON 6902 rationale, neither of which exists in `configuration.md` — and linking out for the raw flag reference.

The `agent-sandbox-controller` exposes several flags that directly affect throughput and API server pressure. Raising these is the first step before running any load test.

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--sandbox-concurrent-workers` | `100` | Max concurrent reconciles for the Sandbox controller |
| `--sandbox-claim-concurrent-workers` | `50` | Max concurrent reconciles for the SandboxClaim controller |
| `--sandbox-warm-pool-concurrent-workers` | `1` | Max concurrent reconciles for the SandboxWarmPool controller |

> | `--sandbox-template-concurrent-workers` | `1` | Max concurrent reconciles for the SandboxTemplate controller |

Reviewer 3: Missing a flag that matters for the warm pool burst recipe. `--sandbox-warm-pool-max-batch-size` (default `300`) caps how many sandboxes the warm pool controller creates or deletes per batch, so it bounds warm pool fill rate independently of the worker count above it.

```suggestion
| `--sandbox-template-concurrent-workers` | `1` | Max concurrent reconciles for the SandboxTemplate controller |
| `--sandbox-warm-pool-max-batch-size` | `300` | Max sandboxes the SandboxWarmPool controller creates or deletes in a single batch |
```

| `--kube-api-qps` | `-1` (no client-side throttling) | Disables client-side rate limiting to the Kubernetes API server. Server-side throttling (API Priority and Fairness) still applies. When setting a positive value, use at least the sum of all `--*-concurrent-workers` flags to avoid starving reconcile loops. |

> | `--kube-api-burst` | `10` | Max burst for API server throttle requests. Ignored when `--kube-api-qps` is `-1`. When `--kube-api-qps` is set to a positive value, set this to equal or greater than `--kube-api-qps`. |

Reviewer 3: "Ignored when `--kube-api-qps` is `-1`" is right in effect, since client-go drops the rate limiter entirely for a negative QPS. It may still mislead someone into setting `--kube-api-burst=0` to signal "unused" — `cmd/agent-sandbox-controller/main.go:207` hard-exits on `kube-api-burst <= 0` regardless of what QPS is set to.

Half a sentence noting the value must stay positive even when unused would spare someone a crash loop.

### Choosing worker counts

Each `--*-concurrent-workers` flag controls the number of independent goroutines the corresponding controller runs. For example, setting `--sandbox-claim-concurrent-workers=10` allows the SandboxClaim controller to process up to 10 SandboxClaims in parallel.

A good starting point is to size each value to the expected steady-state object count for that type, or to a calculated fraction of your maximum burst load. A cluster with a single WarmPool only needs `--sandbox-warm-pool-concurrent-workers=1`.

**Important caveat:** increasing worker counts only improves throughput when the controller itself is the bottleneck. If the bottleneck is the kube-apiserver or the container runtime (e.g., slow pod startup), adding more workers can actually *increase* latency by creating additional API server contention. Use the metrics in the [Metrics Collected](#metrics-collected) section and APF dashboards to confirm where the bottleneck lies before tuning these values.

### Applying Flags

**Via manifest** — edit the relevant manifest for your deployment:

> *Core install (`manifest.yaml`):*

Reviewer 3: `manifest.yaml` is a retired asset name. Current release assets are `sandbox.yaml`, `extensions.yaml`, and `sandbox-with-extensions.yaml` — `docs/api-migration-guide.md` lines 80-82 show `manifest.yaml` commented out with `sandbox.yaml` as its replacement, and both `site/content/docs/getting_started/install_prerequisites/_index.md` and `README.md` lines 100-114 use the new names.

The snippet also mixes frames. `image: ko://…` appears only in the in-repo sources; the published assets carry a real `registry.k8s.io/agent-sandbox/agent-sandbox-controller:<version>` image. Pick one and label it accordingly — either `k8s/controller.yaml` for the in-repo file, or `sandbox.yaml` with a registry image for the release asset.

```yaml
containers:
- name: agent-sandbox-controller
  image: ko://sigs.k8s.io/agent-sandbox/cmd/agent-sandbox-controller
  args:
  - --leader-elect=true
  - --sandbox-concurrent-workers=10
  - --sandbox-claim-concurrent-workers=10
  - --sandbox-warm-pool-concurrent-workers=10
  - --kube-api-qps=50
  - --kube-api-burst=100
```

> *Extensions install (`extensions.yaml`) — note the additional `--extensions` flag, which enables the SandboxTemplate controller and its associated RBAC:*

Reviewer 3: Same asset naming issue as above, and here it bites harder. In-repo `k8s/extensions.yaml` is RBAC only — a ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding, no Deployment and no `args` — so a reader who opens it finds nothing resembling this snippet. The extensions Deployment lives in `k8s/extensions.controller.yaml`.

The published `extensions.yaml` release asset does concatenate every `k8s/**/*.yaml` and so does contain the Deployment, which is presumably where this came from. Naming the source file explicitly would remove the ambiguity.

Worth mentioning too that `k8s/kustomization.yaml` already exists for kustomize consumers and patches `--extensions` onto the single core Deployment. The Kustomize section below might reasonably start from that rather than from a bare patch file.

### Basic startup latency test

This test creates a set of Sandboxes and measures their startup latency.

**1. Build ClusterLoader2** (run from `perf-tests/clusterloader2/`):

```bash
go build -o clusterloader2 ./cmd/clusterloader.go
```

**2. Run the test:**

```bash
# Against a GKE cluster
./clusterloader2 \
  --testconfig=../../agent-sandbox/dev/load-test/agent-sandbox-load-test.yaml \
  --kubeconfig=$HOME/.kube/config \
  --provider=gke

# Against a local kind cluster
./clusterloader2 \
  --testconfig=../../agent-sandbox/dev/load-test/agent-sandbox-load-test.yaml \
  --kubeconfig=$HOME/.kube/config \
  --provider=kind
```

**3. Verify results** — results are saved to `junit.xml` in the `clusterloader2/` directory:

```xml
<testsuite name="ClusterLoaderV2" tests="0" failures="0" errors="0" time="57.957">
  <testcase name="agent-sandbox-load-test: [step: 01] Start Startup Latency Measurement" .../>
  <testcase name="agent-sandbox-load-test: [step: 02] Create Sandboxes" .../>
  <testcase name="agent-sandbox-load-test: [step: 03] Wait for Sandboxes to be Ready" .../>
  <testcase name="agent-sandbox-load-test: [step: 04] Gather Results" .../>
</testsuite>
```

---

## Test Recipes

> `dev/load-test/test-recipes/` contains ready-made scenarios for more demanding performance testing. Each recipe uses Prometheus to collect detailed metrics.

Reviewer 3: "Each recipe uses Prometheus to collect detailed metrics" overstates it. Only `rapid-burst-test.yaml` and `throughput-test.yaml` issue Prometheus queries via `GenericPrometheusQuery`. The other three rely on CL2's native `PodStartupLatency` and `SchedulingThroughput` methods, which do not go through Prometheus.

See my note on the Metrics Collected section for the full per-recipe breakdown.

|----------|---------|-------------|
| `BURST_SIZE` | `1000` | SandboxClaims created per burst iteration |
| `QPS` | `1000` | Max creation rate (queries per second) |
| `TOTAL_BURSTS` | `10` | Total number of burst iterations |
| `WARMPOOL_SIZE` | `1000` | Pre-warmed sandboxes to maintain |
| `RUNTIME_CLASS` | `""` (none) | RuntimeClassName for the SandboxTemplate — set to `gvisor` if your cluster supports it |

> **Note:** These are the script's own defaults, sized for a well-tuned cluster. For a first run, or before raising controller concurrency, start with the more conservative `BURST_SIZE=400 QPS=400` shown above.

Total claims created = `BURST_SIZE × TOTAL_BURSTS`.

For maximum throughput testing, consider raising controller concurrency alongside `QPS`:

```yaml
args:
- --kube-api-qps=1000
- --kube-api-burst=2000
- --sandbox-concurrent-workers=400
- --sandbox-claim-concurrent-workers=400
- --sandbox-warm-pool-concurrent-workers=10
- --sandbox-template-concurrent-workers=2
```

#### Output

All artifacts (CL2 log, test overrides, Prometheus reports) are saved to a timestamped directory at `${TEST_DIR}/tmp/${RUN_ID}`.

---

## Metrics Collected

> All load test recipes collect the following Prometheus-backed metrics:

Reviewer 3: This is not accurate, and it is the claim most likely to send someone hunting for a metric that was never emitted. Only `rapid-burst-test.yaml` collects the two `agent_sandbox_claim_*_startup_latency_ms_bucket` families documented below. The others differ in both method and label selector.

| Recipe | Measurements |
|---|---|
| `rapid-burst-test.yaml` | `SandboxStartupLatency` (PodStartupLatency), `SandboxClaimStartupLatency` (GenericPrometheusQuery, requires a user-configured Webhook) and `SandboxClaimControllerStartupLatency` (GenericPrometheusQuery) |
| `high-volume-test.yaml` | `SchedulingThroughput`, `SandboxStartupLatency` (PodStartupLatency) |
| `medium-scale-concurrent-load-test.yaml` | `SandboxStartupLatency` (PodStartupLatency), selector `group=continuous-churn-group` |
| `throughput-test.yaml` | `SchedulingThroughput`, `ReadyPerSecond` (GenericPrometheusQuery), `SandboxStartupLatency` (PodStartupLatency) |
| `warmpool-burst-test.yaml` | `ColdAcquisitionLatency` (PodStartupLatency), selector `latency-type=cold` |

Scoping the sentence to the rapid burst recipe, and noting which recipes surface which metrics, would fix it. `throughput-test.yaml`'s `ReadyPerSecond` query is also undocumented here.

### SandboxClaim startup latency

Measures the end-to-end time from when the kube-apiserver receives the SandboxClaim create request to when the claim is marked as Ready (implying the claim, sandbox, and pod are all ready).

> > **Note:** This metric requires a mutating admission webhook to record the start timestamp. The webhook is not yet merged (see PR #761). Because the kube-apiserver and controller may run on different nodes, this metric may include clock skew.

Reviewer 3: This was my own earlier comment and it has since gone stale — #761 merged. The example webhook now lives at `examples/webhook-inject-timestamp/`, with setup instructions in `examples/webhook-inject-timestamp/testing_webhook_guide.md`.

Suggest replacing "not yet merged" with a pointer to that guide. The clock skew caveat still stands and is worth keeping.

| Metric | Prometheus query | Default threshold |
|--------|-----------------|-------------------|
| `ControllerStartupLatency50` | `histogram_quantile(0.50, sum(rate(agent_sandbox_claim_controller_startup_latency_ms_bucket{}[%v])) by (le))` | 1 000 ms |
| `ControllerStartupLatency90` | `histogram_quantile(0.90, sum(rate(agent_sandbox_claim_controller_startup_latency_ms_bucket{}[%v])) by (le))` | 1 000 ms |
| `ControllerStartupLatency99` | `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(agent_sandbox_claim_controller_startup_latency_ms_bucket{}[%v])) by (le))` | 5 000 ms |

### Scheduling throughput

> `SchedulingThroughput` — measured via CL2's built-in `PodStartupLatency` method, tracking pods labelled `app=agent-sandbox-load-test`.

Reviewer 3: This conflates two separate measurements. In `dev/load-test/test-recipes/throughput-test.yaml` lines 22-23, `SchedulingThroughput` uses CL2's `SchedulingThroughput` method. The `PodStartupLatency` method backs a different identifier, `SandboxStartupLatency`.

`app=agent-sandbox-load-test` is also not the universal selector — `medium-scale-concurrent-load-test.yaml` uses `group=continuous-churn-group` and `warmpool-burst-test.yaml` uses `latency-type=cold`.

Splitting this into two bullets, one per measurement, with the selector noted per recipe, would make it accurate.

### Applying Flags

**Via manifest** — edit the relevant manifest for your deployment. The snippets below show the in-repo source under `k8s/`; the corresponding release assets (`sandbox.yaml`, `extensions.yaml`) carry the same `args`, but with the `ko://` placeholder replaced by a published `registry.k8s.io/agent-sandbox/agent-sandbox-controller:<version>` image.

*Core install (`k8s/controller.yaml`):*

```yaml
containers:
- name: agent-sandbox-controller
  image: ko://sigs.k8s.io/agent-sandbox/cmd/agent-sandbox-controller
  args:
  - --leader-elect=true
  - --sandbox-concurrent-workers=10
  - --sandbox-claim-concurrent-workers=10
  - --sandbox-warm-pool-concurrent-workers=10
  - --kube-api-qps=50
  - --kube-api-burst=100
```

> *Extensions install (`k8s/extensions.controller.yaml`) — note the additional `--extensions` flag, which enables the SandboxTemplate controller and its associated RBAC. (`k8s/extensions.yaml` is RBAC only — the Deployment lives in this separate file so `kubectl apply -f k8s/*.yaml` doesn't declare two Deployments.):*

Reviewer 3: The filename fix is right, but the rationale added alongside it is inverted. This says the Deployment lives in a separate file "so `kubectl apply -f k8s/*.yaml` doesn't declare two Deployments" — the opposite is true on both counts.

`k8s/extensions.controller.yaml` **is** a second copy of the controller Deployment, and `kubectl apply -f k8s/*.yaml` would therefore pick up two. `k8s/kustomization.yaml` says so directly, calling it "a second copy of the controller Deployment; we patch the core one instead", and `dev/tools/release` calls it "the intentionally-excluded duplicate controller Deployment".

The actual reason for the split is the sequential-apply path. Per the header comment in `k8s/kustomization.yaml`, `sandbox.yaml` and `extensions.yaml` "are designed for sequential `kubectl apply -f` and therefore both declare the agent-sandbox-controller Deployment" — applying `extensions.yaml` after `sandbox.yaml` deliberately re-declares the Deployment with `--extensions` on it. Kustomize can't tolerate duplicate resource ids, which is exactly why `kustomization.yaml` excludes this file and patches the core Deployment instead.

Suggest replacing the parenthetical with something along these lines:

```suggestion
*Extensions install (`k8s/extensions.controller.yaml`) — note the additional `--extensions` flag, which enables the SandboxTemplate controller and its associated RBAC. (`k8s/extensions.yaml` is RBAC only. This file is a second copy of the controller Deployment, applied after the core one so the sequential `sandbox.yaml` → `extensions.yaml` path lands a Deployment with `--extensions` set. Kustomize consumers get the same result via the patch in `k8s/kustomization.yaml`, which excludes this file.):*
```

- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--kube-api-qps=50"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--kube-api-burst=100"
```

*Extensions install — also tune `--sandbox-template-concurrent-workers`:*

```yaml
# patch-args.yaml
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--sandbox-concurrent-workers=10"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--sandbox-claim-concurrent-workers=10"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--sandbox-warm-pool-concurrent-workers=10"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--sandbox-template-concurrent-workers=10"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--kube-api-qps=50"
- op: add
  path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
  value: "--kube-api-burst=100"
```

Reference the patch from `kustomization.yaml` using `patches` with an explicit `target` and `options.type: json`:

```yaml
# kustomization.yaml
patches:
  - path: patch-args.yaml
    target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: agent-sandbox-controller
      namespace: agent-sandbox-system
    options:

>       type: json

Reviewer 3: +1 to the suggested fix.

| Metric | Prometheus query | Default threshold |
|--------|-----------------|-------------------|
| `ControllerStartupLatency50` | `histogram_quantile(0.50, sum(rate(agent_sandbox_claim_controller_startup_latency_ms_bucket{}[%v])) by (le))` | 1 000 ms |
| `ControllerStartupLatency90` | `histogram_quantile(0.90, sum(rate(agent_sandbox_claim_controller_startup_latency_ms_bucket{}[%v])) by (le))` | 1 000 ms |
| `ControllerStartupLatency99` | `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(agent_sandbox_claim_controller_startup_latency_ms_bucket{}[%v])) by (le))` | 5 000 ms |

### Scheduling throughput and pod startup latency

These are two distinct measurements, backed by different CL2 methods:

- `SchedulingThroughput` (`high-volume-test.yaml`, `throughput-test.yaml`) — pod scheduling rate, via CL2's built-in `SchedulingThroughput` method.
- `SandboxStartupLatency` / `ColdAcquisitionLatency` (all five recipes) — pod startup latency, via CL2's built-in `PodStartupLatency` method. The label selector varies per recipe — see the table above. `rapid-burst-test.yaml` additionally collects the two Prometheus-backed SandboxClaim metrics documented below.

> `throughput-test.yaml` also runs `ReadyPerSecond`, a `GenericPrometheusQuery` measurement of pods entering the `Running` phase per second; it isn't documented elsewhere in this guide.

Reviewer 3: Non-blocking, and the root cause sits outside this PR. Describing `ReadyPerSecond` as measuring "pods entering the `Running` phase per second" matches the recipe's own inline comment, but not what the recipe actually queries. `dev/load-test/test-recipes/throughput-test.yaml:32` has:

```
sum(kube_pod_status_phase{phase="Running", namespace=~"throughput-test-ns-.*"})[5m])
```

That is an instant gauge sum of pods currently in `Running`, with no `rate()` anywhere, so it reports a count rather than a per-second rate despite the `pods/s` unit. It also has unbalanced parentheses and a `[5m]` range applied to a vector expression, so it isn't valid PromQL and won't evaluate.

Since this guide shouldn't have to carry the fix, I'd suggest just naming the measurement here without characterizing what it reports, and filing a separate issue against the recipe. Happy to open that issue if you'd rather not.
